######### au format de MLA
1.Koudoro-Parfait, Caroline, Gaël Lejeune, and Glenn Roe. "Spatial Named Entity Recognition in Literary Texts: What is the Influence of OCR Noise?." Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Geospatial Humanities. 2021.
Exploring text collections through named entities remains a very common need for scholars. Despite the recent advances of Named Entity Recognition (NER) systems, more efficient and easier to use, the task remains problematic when the data is not born digital and thus more prone to Optical Character Recognition errors. In this paper, we investigate the real influence of noise on the extraction of locations in a collection of ten books in French exhibiting different levels of difficulties for NER systems (digitization quality, complexity of layout, variation in language). We compare the results of various systems on the "clean" version of the documents and on different OCRed versions. We show that NER systems do not yield many more errors in noisy documents, most of the errors being already there on a reference version, and in some cases NER performs better on noisy versions. According to our results, the main problem is rare entities (especially hapax) which are more likely to disappear from of the output.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3486187.3490206?casa_token=aL53XW1wirsAAAAA:mwJGhIfPfnJseSHj6QPuMyFat9ZpL1f32fzr0JOe7tvNveCsL0ImJ8MTSnLMDuGT0euZW1YcLPbJeA

2.Lejeune, Gaël. "De la variation linguistique et de son influence sur l'application de méthodes de Traitement Automatique des Langues." Diss. Sorbonne Universite, 2023.
Cette habilitation à diriger les recherches traite de la variation des données textuelles et de son influence sur l'application de méthodes de Traitement Automatique des Langues (TAL). Différents types de variation sont examinés : variation de la langue, variation de la qualité des données, variation de l'homogénéité des corpus et variation du genre textuel. Nous posons, d'une part, la question des observables du TAL. Il s'agit d'interroger la pertinence du paradigme, majoritaire dans le domaine, consistant à envisager les documents avant tout à travers des représentations en mots, très sensibles aux variations de toutes sortes, au détriment par exemple d'approches en chaînes de caractères plus robustes. D'autre part, nous interrogeons les observatoires du TAL en proposant des pistes pour exploiter les genres textuels des documents et tirer des corpus desquels ils sont tirés des propriétés utiles au traitement automatique à rebours d'une approche où le sdocuments sont simplement des séquences de MOts et/ou de sous-mots. Nous montrons notamment comment la structure des documents et le genre textuel peuvent-être exploités pour concevoir des modèles de TAL.
https://hal.science/tel-04360967/

3.Lita, Lucian Vlad, et al. "Truecasing." Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 2003.
Truecasing is the process of restoring case information to badly-cased or noncased text. This paper explores truecasing issues and proposes a statistical, language modeling based truecaser which achieves an accuracy of ∼98% on news articles. Task based evaluation shows a 26% F-measure improvement in named entity recognition when using truecasing. In the context of automatic content extraction, mention detection on automatic speech recognition text is also improved by a factor of 8. Truecasing also enhances machine translation output legibility and yields a BLEU score improvement of 80.2%. This paper argues for the use of truecasing as a valuable component in text processing applications.
https://aclanthology.org/P03-1020.pdf

4.Luoma, Jouni, and Sampo Pyysalo. "Exploring cross-sentence contexts for named entity recognition with BERT." arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01563 (2020).
 Named entity recognition (NER) is frequently addressed as a sequence classification task where each input consists of one sentence of text. It is nevertheless clear that useful information for the task can often be found outside of the scope of a single-sentence context. Recently proposed self-attention models such as BERT can both efficiently capture long-distance relationships in input as well as represent inputs consisting of several sentences, creating new opportunitites for approaches that incorporate cross-sentence information in natural language processing tasks. In this paper, we present a systematic study exploring the use of cross-sentence information for NER using BERT models in five languages. We find that adding context in the form of additional sentences to BERT input systematically increases NER performance on all of the tested languages and models. Including multiple sentences in each input also allows us to study the predictions of the same sentences in different contexts. We propose a straightforward method, Contextual Majority Voting (CMV), to combine different predictions for sentences and demonstrate this to further increase NER performance with BERT. Our approach does not require any changes to the underlying BERT architecture, rather relying on restructuring examples for training and prediction. Evaluation on established datasets, including the CoNLL'02 and CoNLL'03 NER benchmarks, demonstrates that our proposed approach can improve on the state-of-the-art NER results on English, Dutch, and Finnish, achieves the best reported BERT-based results on German, and is on par with performance reported with other BERT-based approaches in Spanish. We release all methods implemented in this work under open licenses.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.01563


5.Foley, John J. "Poetry: Identification, entity recognition, and retrieval." (2019).
Modern advances in natural language processing (NLP) and information retrieval (IR) provide for the ability to automatically analyze, categorize, process and search textual resources. However, generalizing these approaches remains an open problem: models that appear to understand certain types of data must be re-trained on other domains. Often, models make assumptions about the length, structure, discourse model and vocabulary used by a particular corpus. Trained models can often become biased toward an original dataset, learning that – for example – all capitalized words are names of people or that short documents are more relevant than longer documents. As a result, small amounts of noise or shifts in style can cause models to fail on unseen data. The key to more robust models is to look at text analytics tasks on more challenging and diverse data. Poetry is an ancient art form that is believed to pre-date writing and is still a key form of expression through text today. Some poetry forms (e.g., haiku and sonnets) have rigid structure but still break our traditional expectations of text. Other poetry forms drop punctuation and other rules in favor of expression. Our contributions include a set of novel, challenging datasets that extend traditional tasks: a text classification task for which content features perform poorly, a named entity recognition task that is inherently ambiguous, and a retrieval corpus over the largest public collection of poetry ever released. We begin by looking at poetry identification - the task of finding poetry within existing textual collections, and devise an effective method of extracting poetry based on how it is usually formatted within digitally scanned books, since content models do not generalize well. Then we work on the content of poetry: we construct a dataset of around 6,000 tagged spans that identify the people, places, organizations and personified concepts within poetry. We show that cross-training with existing datasets based on news-corpora helps modern models to learn to recognize entities within poetry. Finally, we return to IR, and construct a dataset of queries and documents inspired by real-world data that expose some of the key challenges of searching through poetry. Our work is the first significant effort to use poetry in these three tasks and our datasets and models will provide strong baselines for new avenues of research on this challenging domain.
https://scholarworks.umass.edu/entities/publication/d1b4b074-4f3a-43a1-9ccb-a4917466ac91


6.Zhou, Faguo, Chao Wang, and Jipeng Wang. "Named Entity Recognition of Ancient Poems Based on Albert‐BiLSTM‐MHA‐CRF Model." Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing 2022.1 (2022): 6507719.
The extraction and construction of the knowledge graph related to the entity of ancient poems are helpful to excavate the connection between ancient poems, and it is of great significance to inherit the traditional Chinese culture. This paper proposes an Albert-BiLSTM-MHA-CRF model for entity extraction in ancient poems. Based on the BiLSTM-CRF model, the author introduces the Albert pretraining model and the multihead self-attention mechanism to extract character vectors and enhance the generalization ability of word embedding vectors and the potential semantics between characters of the model, depending on weight and other feature extraction capabilities. The experiment is carried out in the corpus of ancient poetry, and the model is compared with Bert-BiLSTM-CRF, BiLSTM-CRF, and CRF model. The results show that the entity extraction effect of ancient poetry is significantly improved, and the harmonic average value is 97.17%. Compared with Bert model as the pretraining model, Albert model reduces the time by 19.56%.
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1155/2022/6507719


7.Romanello, Matteo, and Sven Najem-Meyer. "A Named Entity-Annotated Corpus of 19th Century Classical Commentaries." Journal of Open Humanities Data 10.1 (2024).
This paper reports on the project Namescape: Mapping the Landscape of Names in Modern Dutch Literature, funded by CLARIN-NL. The background of the project is research in literary onomastics, the study of the usage and functions of proper names in literary (i.e. fictional) texts. The two main tasks for the project were to adapt existing Named Entity Recognition software to modern Dutch fiction, and to perform Named Entity Resolution by linking the names to Wikipedia entries. For Named Entity Recognition, existing tools have been trained on literary texts and a new NE tagger has been developed. The standard list of name categories had to be extended, since the analysis of the usage of proper names in literature needs to distinguish e.g. between first names and family names. The Named Entity Resolution task was done to explore the possibility of labeling the names in fiction in another way, by categorizing a name as referring to a person or location that only exist in the story of a fictional work (plot-internal names), or one referring to a person or location in the real world (plot-external names). This distinction is linked to the hypothesis that plot-internal and plot-external names can have different (stylistic and narrative) functions. Automatically marking them up is the first step toward testing that hypothesis on a large corpus. In this paper we describe the results of these two main tasks.
https://clinjournal.org/clinj/article/view/45


8.Silva, Mariana O., and Mirella M. Moro. "PPORTAL_ner: An Annotated Corpus of Portuguese Literary Entities." Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024). 2024.
The intersection of natural language processing (NLP) and literary analysis has yielded valuable insights and applications across various languages. However, the scarcity of labeled data tailored for Portuguese literary texts poses a notable challenge. To address this gap, we present the PPORTAL_ner corpus, an annotated dataset that simplifies the development of Named Entity Recognition (NER) models specifically adapted for Portuguese literary works. Our corpus includes annotations of PER, LOC, GPE, ORG, and DATE entities within a diverse set of 25 literary texts. Annotation of the corpus involved a two-step process: initial pre-annotation using a pre-trained spaCy model followed by correction and refinement using the Prodigy annotation tool. With a total of 125,059 tokens and 5,266 annotated entities, PPORTAL_ner corpus significantly enriches the landscape of resources available for computational literary analysis in Portuguese. This paper details the annotation methodology, guidelines, and dataset statistics while also evaluating four NER models over the PPORTAL_ner corpus. Our evaluation analysis reveals that fine-tuning on domain-specific data significantly improves NER model performance, demonstrating the value of the PPORTAL_ner corpus for developing domain-specific language models.
https://aclanthology.org/2024.lrec-main.1132/


9.Ludovic Moncla, Mauro Gaio, Thierry Joliveau, and Yves-François Le Lay. 2017. "Automated Geoparsing of Paris Street Names in 19th Century Novels." In Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop on Geospatial Humanities (GeoHumanities '17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1145/3149858.3149859）
Our project involves building a platform able to retrieve, map and analyze the occurrences of place names in fictional novels published between 1800 and 1914 and whose action occurs wholly or partly in Paris. We describe a proof of concept using queries made via the TXM textual analysis platform for the extraction of street names. Then, we propose a fully automatic process using the named entity recognition (NER) components of the PERDIDO platform. This paper describes some encouraging initial results obtained by combining NLP approaches (NER methods) with textometric tools for the automated geoparsing of street names.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3149858.3149859


10.Kogkitsidou, Eleni, and Philippe Gambette. "Normalisation of 16th and 17th century texts in French and geographical named entity recognition." Proceedings of the 4th ACM SIGSPATIAL Workshop on Geospatial Humanities. 2020.
Both statistical and rule-based methods for named entity recognition are quite sensitive to the type of language used in the analysed texts. Former studies have shown for example that it was harder to detect named entities in SMS or microblog messages where words are abridged or changed to lowercase. In this article, we focus on old French texts to evaluate the impact of manual and automatic normalisation before applying five geographical named entity recognition tools, as well as an improved version of one of them, in order to help building maps displaying the locations mentioned in ancient texts. Our results show that manual normalisation leads to better results for all methods and that automatic normalisation performs differently depending on the tool used to extract geographical named entities, but with a significant improvement on most methods.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3423337.3429437

11.Hang Le, Loïc Vial, Jibril Frej, Vincent Segonne, Maximin Coavoux, Benjamin Lecouteux, Alexandre Allauzen, Benoit Crabbé, Laurent Besacier, and Didier Schwab. 2020. FlauBERT: Unsupervised Language Model Pre-training for French. In Proceedings of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages 2479–2490, Marseille, France. European Language Resources Association.
https://aclanthology.org/2020.lrec-1.302/

12.Louis Martin, Benjamin Muller, Pedro Javier Ortiz Suárez, Yoann Dupont, Laurent Romary, Éric de la Clergerie, Djamé Seddah, and Benoît Sagot. 2020. CamemBERT: a Tasty French Language Model. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 7203–7219, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.645/

13.Bannour, N., Servan, C., Névéol, A., & Tannier, X. (2024). A Benchmark Evaluation of Clinical Named Entity Recognition in French. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19726.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.19726



###### 0426  reste à ajouter :

11. Koudoro-Parfait C., Lejeune G. & Buth R. (2022). « Reconnaissance d’entités nommées sur des sorties OCR bruitées : des pistes pour la désambiguïsation morphologique automatique », in Actes de la 29e Conférence sur le Traitement Automatique des Langues Naturelles. Atelier TAL et Humanités Numériques (TAL-HN), 45-55. https://aclanthology.org/2022.jeptalnrecital-humanum.6.

12.Koudoro-Parfait C., Petkovic L. & Roe G. (2024). « Analyse multilingue de l’impact de la correction automatique de la ROC sur la reconnaissance d’entités nommées spatiales dans des corpus littéraires », Revue TAL : Robustesse et limites des modèles de traitement automatique des langues 64(2) [à paraître].
https://journals.openedition.org/corpus/9059


13. des articles scientifiques qui définissent la REN
